[Music]
a man
is chased by a tiger suddenly
he encounters an abandoned well he jumps
in
hoping that a tiger can't reach him
there but then
he realizes that there is a poisonous
snake at the bottom
of this dried out well before he reaches
the bottom he grabs our root
poking out of the wall and holds on the
tiger looks at him from the top
waiting for him to get out and the snake
is waiting at the bottom for him to fall
down
shortly after two mice appear from a
hole in the wall
and start chewing on the root he is
holding onto
now what to do next
this is part of a buddhist story about a
state of life that many of us
find ourselves in from time to time a
state in which there doesn't seem to be
a way out
it's no secret that life can be very
difficult and painful
and sometimes we're running from our
problems only to run
into more difficulties and when our
sense of security
is stripped away from us we come to
realize that we are at the mercy of an
uncontrollable
and terrible fate everything is falling
apart
and there's nothing that we can do about
it
when we're hanging onto a route that's
chewed away by mice
with a hungry snake below and an even
hungrier tiger above us what can we
possibly do
to get out of this situation what is the
best course of action when there seems
to be no way out
when life falls apart we might want to
remember that everything changes
all the time like night turns into day
bad fortune turns into good fortune and
a curse
turns into a blessing so could it be
that
eventually life doesn't fall apart but
into place
[Music]
what should we do when life falls apart
we're in a miserable situation and
there's no way out
the first thing to consider is that it's
not the circumstances that make us
miserable
but the way we perceive these
circumstances
even though the man hanging between a
tiger and a snake
is powerless when it comes to his
external circumstances
it's his perception that decides his
mood
knowing that this is a buddhist story
it's probably no surprise
that this man has been practicing at his
local temple
and is pretty aware of what the buddha
called the eight worldly winds
which are pleasure and pain gain and
loss
praise and blame fame and disrepute
most people are controlled by the eight
worldly winds
when they are in pain they suffer when
they experience pleasure
they're joyful when their reputation
goes down the drain
they become depressed but when they're
famous and loved
they're ecstatic the problem with this
way
of life is the slavish relationship with
the environment that goes with it
as external things decide our mood while
the same external things
are not up to us so when our happiness
depends on the behavior of the eight
worldly winds we're in a very
unreliable position without a doubt
an average person would probably be
frightened when hanging between a snake
and a tiger
waiting for the only sense of security
to be eaten away
by mice but as an avid practitioner of
buddhism
this man calmly observes the situation
then he suddenly sees honey that is
dripping from a beehive
sitting in a tree above the well he
smiles
and starts licking the honey
now in the face of misery finding such
joy
can be considered mutiny against the
system
because when even the most terrible
circumstances won't stop him
from enjoying what the present moment
has to offer he has claimed true freedom
from the fickleness of a universe that
enslaves most of its subjects
the poor souls whose lives are nothing
but the suffering of its whims
this is the freedom that philosopher
albert camus was talking about
when he claimed that the only way to
deal with an unfree world
is to become so absolutely free that our
very
existence is an act of rebellion the man
in the well
knew that he shouldn't panic or burst
out in anger as
the situation he is in is to be expected
the occurrence of unpleasant or even
life-threatening events is an
unavoidable part of life so the best
thing he could do
is to find joy in his darkest hour
something that
as opposed to his predicament lies
within his field of control
but there was something else that made
him decide to stay calm and collected
while hanging between the tiger and the
snake
during his buddhist practice he had
learned the truth about existence
which he reminded himself of when life
goes well
and also when life falls apart
that change occurs is certain we just
don't know where change will bring us
but when we're finding ourselves in dire
straits and there seems no way out
it's essential to always remember that
things
change the worldly winds are
unpredictable
one moment they provide us with delight
the other moment
with agony once upon a time there was an
eastern king who was overjoyed and
overconfident when times were good
but depressed when times were bad
so the sage handed him a ring with a
simple sentence
engraved in it this too shall pass
the ring reminded him every day of the
transient nature of life
so when times were good he prepared for
bad times
and when times were bad he was certain
that how permanent and unescapable these
moments might seem
they too shall pass however
the power of change is often
underestimated because we're unable to
foresee the future
when we're stuck in our perception of
the current situation
it's difficult to conceive how the
future may play out
as there are so many variables and so
many possibilities
people in despair commonly believe that
their misery is never ending
as the light at the end of the tunnel
has yet to present itself
they're stuck in a mere perception of
what's happening
at a particular moment without taking
into consideration that
change is occurring in the background
this means
that this reality we base our
assessments on is
shifting thus what we perceive
as our life falling apart may actually
be our life
falling into place oftentimes in ways
that we don't expect we do know by
experience
that in most cases the future plays out
differently than we had previously
expected
moreover it's not unlikely that the
future unfolds in ways
that are nothing less than surprising
this happened to the man in the well
whose fate seemed to be sealed but was
caught by surprise
when the tiger hungry as it was leaned
too much to the front
and fell into the well right past the
man squashed
the snake and broke his neck by the fall
and so the man was able to climb out and
survive
therefore no matter how miserable things
seem at the moment
the solution may be at our doorstep as
the course of the wind
changes to our advantage so again
when life seems to fall apart it may
actually be falling into place
however we'll never know beforehand what
fortune will bring us
this means that it's futile to hope for
a certain outcome
as the stoic philosopher epictetus put
it don't demand
that things happen as you wish but wish
that they happen
as they do happen and you will go on
well
sometimes there's just nothing we can do
about the circumstances we're in
no matter how painful which was the case
with a man in the well
but we can choose the position we take
towards
these circumstances pain is certain
suffering is optional so do we give
unpleasant circumstances the power to
make us miserable
or do we enjoy some honey instead
thank you for watching
[Music]
you